# Git

## What is Git?

Git is a distributed version control system that is widely used by developers to manage source code, track changes, and collaborate on software projects. It provides a platform for developers to work together on codebases, share updates, and maintain a history of changes over time.

[Learn more about Git](https://git-scm.com/)

## Why use Git?

- **Version Control**: Git allows developers to track changes to source code, revert to previous versions, and collaborate on codebases with other team members.
- **Collaboration**: Git provides a platform for developers to work together on software projects, share updates, and resolve conflicts in code changes.
- **History Tracking**: Git maintains a history of changes to source code, making it easy to review, compare, and analyze code changes over time.

## How to install Git?

To install Git on Ubuntu follow these steps:

1. Open the **Terminal**.
2. Install Git using the `apt` package manager:

   ```bash
    sudo apt install git
    ```

3. Verify the installation by checking the Git version:

   ```bash
    git --version
    ```

After installing Git, you can configure your Git identity by setting your name and email address using the `git config` command.

## How to use Git?

To use Git, open the **Terminal** and navigate to your project directory. Initialize a new Git repository by running the `git init` command. Add files to the staging area using the `git add` command and commit changes to the repository using the `git commit` command.

You can create branches, merge changes, and collaborate with other developers using Git commands such as `git branch`, `git checkout`, `git merge`, and `git push`.

## How to configure Git?

To configure your Git identity, run the following commands in the Terminal:

```bash
git config --global user.name "Your Name"
git config --global user.email "
```

You can also set other Git configurations such as the default text editor, line endings, and color settings using the `git config` command.

You can use the [Ansible post installation playbook](https://github.com/TerrorSquad/ansible-post-installation/) to automate the installation and configuration of Git on Ubuntu.

It will install Git, set up your Git identity, and configure other Git settings based on your preferences.

The configuration file is available in the [Ansible-post-installation](https://github.com/TerrorSquad/ansible-post-installation/blob/master/post-installation/defaults/.gitconfig) repository.

Configuration file:

```yaml
[core]
 pager = delta
 autocrlf = false
 eol = LF
 fileMode = false
 excludesfile = ~/.gitignore
[pager]
 diff = LESS='LR --mouse' delta
 show = LESS='LR --mouse' delta
 stash = LESS='LR --mouse' delta
 log = LESS='LR --mouse' delta
 reflog = LESS='LR --mouse' delta

[interactive]
    diffFilter = delta --color-only

[delta]
    features = unobtrusive-line-numbers decorations
    whitespace-error-style = 22 reverse
    navigate = true  # use n and N to move between diff sections

[delta "unobtrusive-line-numbers"]
    line-numbers = true
    line-numbers-minus-style = "#bb4444"
    line-numbers-zero-style = "#444444"
    line-numbers-plus-style = "#44bb44"
    line-numbers-left-format = "{nm:>4}┊"
    line-numbers-right-format = "{np:>4}│"
    line-numbers-left-style = blue
    line-numbers-right-style = blue

[delta "decorations"]
    commit-decoration-style = bold yellow box ul
    file-style = bold yellow ul
    file-decoration-style = none
    hunk-header-decoration-style = yellow box
[diff]
 renamelimit = 5000
[init]
 templatedir = ~/.git-templates
 ```

Notable features:

- **Pager**: Delta is used as the pager for Git commands such as `git diff`, `git log`, and `git show`. It provides syntax highlighting, side-by-side diff view, and line numbers.
- **Whitespace Error Style**: Whitespace errors are highlighted in red and reversed style.
- **Interactive Diff Filter**: Delta is used for interactive diffs, allowing you to navigate between diff sections using the `n` and `N` keys.
- **Line Numbers**: Line numbers are displayed in blue color with different styles for added, modified, and removed lines.
- **Decorations**: Commit messages and file names are highlighted in yellow with bold and underline styles.

## Conclusion

Git is a powerful version control system that enables developers to manage source code, track changes, and collaborate on software projects effectively. By using Git commands and workflows, developers can work together on codebases, share updates, and maintain a history of changes over time.

---

## References

- [Git Documentation](https://git-scm.com/doc)
- [Pro Git Book](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2)
- [GitHub Guides](https://guides.github.com/)
- [Git Cheat Sheet](https://education.github.com/git-cheat-sheet-education.pdf)
- [Ansible Post Installation Playbook](https://github.com/TerrorSquad/ansible-post-installation)
