# Node.js

## What is Node.js?

Node.js is an open-source, cross-platform JavaScript runtime environment that allows developers to run JavaScript code outside of a web browser. It is built on the V8 JavaScript engine from Google Chrome and provides a rich set of libraries and modules for building server-side applications, command-line tools, and desktop applications.

[Learn more about Node.js](https://nodejs.org/)

## Why use Node.js?

- **JavaScript Runtime**: Node.js allows developers to run JavaScript code on the server-side, enabling them to build full-stack applications using a single programming language.
- **Asynchronous Programming**: Node.js uses an event-driven, non-blocking I/O model that makes it ideal for building scalable and high-performance applications.
- **Rich Ecosystem**: Node.js has a vast ecosystem of libraries and modules available through the npm package manager, making it easy to extend and customize applications.

## How to install Node.js?

There are several ways to install Node.js on Ubuntu:

- Using the `apt` package manager
- Downloading the Node.js binary from the official website
- Using a package manager such as NVM (Node Version Manager)
- Using the Volta package manager

We will cover the installation of Node.js using the `volta` package manager in this guide.

## How to install Node.js with Volta?

To install Node.js with Volta on Ubuntu follow these steps:

1. Open the **Terminal**.
2. Install Volta using the `curl` command:

   ```bash
   curl https://get.volta.sh | bash
   ```

3. Verify the installation by checking the Volta version:

   ```bash
    volta --version
    ```

4. Install Node.js using Volta:

  ```bash
  volta install node
  ```

5. Verify the installation by checking the Node.js version:

  ```bash
  node --version
  ```

After installing Node.js with Volta, you can use the `node` and `npm` commands to run JavaScript code, manage packages, and build applications.

## Why use Volta?

Volta is a JavaScript tool manager that allows you to install and manage JavaScript tools and runtimes such as Node.js, Yarn, and npm. It provides a consistent and reliable way to manage JavaScript tools across different projects and environments.

[Learn more about Volta](https://volta.sh/)

One of the key features of Volta is the ability to **pin** the versions of JavaScript tools to a specific project, ensuring that all developers working on the project use the same versions of tools. This helps to avoid compatibility issues and ensures that the project builds and runs consistently across different environments.

## Conclusion

Node.js is a powerful JavaScript runtime environment that allows developers to build server-side applications, command-line tools, and desktop applications using JavaScript. By installing Node.js with Volta, you can manage JavaScript tools and runtimes more effectively and ensure that your projects are consistent and reliable.

---

## References

- [Node.js Documentation](https://nodejs.org/)
- [Volta Documentation](https://docs.volta.sh/)
- [npm Documentation](https://docs.npmjs.com/)
- [Ansible post installation playbook](https://github.com/TerrorSquad/ansible-post-installation)
